.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

.. Copyright (C) 2021 embedded brains GmbH & Co. KG

.. include:: ../include/abbreviations.rst

.. _TestingApproach:

Software unit testing and integration testing approach
******************************************************

Unit/integration testing strategy
=================================

As already stated in section 5.1, the strategy performed was to
identify tests at TS level, that due to the modularity of the software could be
used to cover some unit testing [#]_. Unit and integration testing will be done
only if code coverage cannot be achieved through validation tests. In some rare
cases it is practically infeasible to tailor individual RTEMS source files so
that they only contain code for the pre-qualified feature set. In this case
unit and integration tests will be added to achieve the code coverage goal.

.. [#] It is worth to clarify that as  stated in ECSS, structural coverage can
       be achieved through different levels of testing, but not necessarily unit
       testing. Units must be tested, interfaces between units must be tested and
       requirements must be covered. All at each level. Coverage can be measured at
       all levels, and if there is anything missing, an ad hoc test needs to be defined,
       but this does not exempt from the fact that there must be a strategy at each level.

Tasks and items under test
==========================

The task is to test ${/glossary/softwareunit:/plural} and integrations of
software units.  The tests are specified and implemented in specification items
such as
`Test Case Item Type <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/eng/req/items.html#spectypetestcaseitemtype>`_.

Features to be tested
=====================

The following features are tested through unit and integration tests:

* ${/glossary/posix:/term}-specific functionality of the Message Queue Handler

* Functions to get the ``CLOCK_REALTIME`` and ``CLOCK_MONOTONIC`` in various
  time formats

Features not to be tested
=========================

In general, features are not tested through unit or integration tests.

.. _TestPassFailCriteria:

Test pass - fail criteria
=========================

In general, the unit and validation tests use the
`RTEMS Test Framework <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/eng/test-framework.html#the-rtems-test-framework>`_.

A test suite is a collection of test cases.  A test case consists of individual
test actions and checks.  A test check determines if the outcome of a test
action meets its expectation.  A test action is a program sequence with an
observable outcome, for example a function invocation with a return status.  If
a test action produces the expected outcome as determined by the corresponding
test check, then this test check passes, otherwise this test check fails.  The
test check failures of a test case are summed up.  A test case passes, if the
failure count of this test case is zero, otherwise the test case fails.  The
test suite passes if all test cases pass, otherwise it fails.

Manually and automatically generated code
=========================================

The header files containing specified interface, source files for test suites,
and source files for test cases are generated from specification items by a
tool.  Strictly speaking, we have automatically generated code.  However, the
code is not generated during the software build process.  Instead, it is
generated through the development process and the generated code is treated as
it were hand written code.  It is put under configuration control.  Generated
code integrated in the main RTEMS repositories is subject to the
`Patch Review Process <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/user/support/contrib.html#patch-review-process>`_.

The generated files contain a header comment which makes it clear that they are
generated by a tool.  For each generated fragment a reference to the
corresponding specification item is made, for example:

.. code-block:: c

    /* Generated from spec:/rtems/task/if/argument */

    /**
     * @ingroup RTEMSAPIClassicTasks
     *
     * @brief This integer type represents task argument values.
     *
     * @par Notes
     * The type is an architecture-specific unsigned integer type which is large
     * enough to represent pointer values and 32-bit unsigned integers.
     */
    typedef CPU_Uint32ptr rtems_task_argument;

These comments may help RTEMS contributors which would like to make changes in
the generated files and guide them to the right place and tools.

As a conclusion, we do not have automatically generated code in this project
from the perspective of the unit and integration testing.
