.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

.. Copyright (C) 2021 embedded brains GmbH & Co. KG

.. Copyright (C) 2020 EDISOFT

.. include:: ../include/abbreviations.rst

.. _TaskIdentification:

Software validation specification task identification
*****************************************************

Task and criteria
=================

The task is to validate all functional requirements through tests.  The tests
are specified and implemented in specification items such as
`Action Requirement Item Type <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/eng/req/items.html#spectypeactionrequirementitemtype>`_
and
`Test Case Item Type <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/eng/req/items.html#spectypetestcaseitemtype>`_.


It is worth noticing the strategy performed was to identify tests at TS level, that due to the modularity of the software could be
used to cover some unit testing [#]_. Unit and integration testing will be done only if code coverage cannot be achieved through validation
tests.

.. [#] Due to this mixed validation, unit and integration testing approach, for instance, boundary and out-of-boundary testing objectives
       are also included for TS validation.

Features to be tested
=====================

All features included in the pre-qualified feature set of RTEMS are tested.

Features not to be tested
=========================

In general, all features are tested.  Some validation tests require three or
more processors.  If the ${/glossary/target:/term} has less than three
processors, for example the GR712RC, then it is not possible to run these
tests.  The tests can still run on a simulator using the same test executables.

.. _TestPassFailCriteria:

Test pass - fail criteria
=========================

In general, the validation tests use the
`RTEMS Test Framework <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/eng/test-framework.html#the-rtems-test-framework>`_.

A test suite is a collection of test cases.  A test case consists of individual
test actions and checks.  A test check determines if the outcome of a test
action meets its expectation.  A test action is a program sequence with an
observable outcome, for example a function invocation with a return status.  If
a test action produces the expected outcome as determined by the corresponding
test check, then this test check passes, otherwise this test check fails.  The
test check failures of a test case are summed up.  A test case passes, if the
failure count of this test case is zero, otherwise the test case fails.  The
test suite passes if all test cases pass, otherwise it fails.

The test framework produces a line based output which can be parsed to produce
human readable test reports.  From the overall output of a test suite and all
its test cases a hash value is generated on the target.  The hash value is
recalculated by the test report parser.  It is compared with the transferred
hash value to ensure that the transferred test output is valid.

There are some very specific tests which do not report the test results through
the framework.  One example is the test of the system shutdown procedure.  A
certain instruction sequence may reset the target.  In this case there is
nothing left which could execute the software to report the test result.  For
these special cases, the tests are run manually under control of a debugger.
The results are recorded in a validation item with the method
``by-inspection``.

.. _CannotValidatedByTest:

Items that cannot be validated by test
======================================

${.:/not-validated-by-test}

Manually and automatically generated code
=========================================

The header files containing specified interface, source files for test suites,
and source files for test cases are generated from specification items by a
tool.  Strictly speaking, we have automatically generated code.  However, the
code is not generated during the software build process.  Instead, it is
generated through the development process and the generated code is treated as
it were hand written code.  It is put under configuration control.  Generated
code integrated in the main RTEMS repositories is subject to the
`Patch Review Process <${.:/component/deployment-directory}/doc/rtems/user/support/contrib.html#patch-review-process>`_.

The generated files contain a header comment which makes it clear that they are
generated by a tool.  For each generated fragment a reference to the
corresponding specification item is made, for example:

.. code-block:: c

    /* Generated from spec:/rtems/task/if/argument */

    /**
     * @ingroup RTEMSAPIClassicTasks
     *
     * @brief This integer type represents task argument values.
     *
     * @par Notes
     * The type is an architecture-specific unsigned integer type which is large
     * enough to represent pointer values and 32-bit unsigned integers.
     */
    typedef CPU_Uint32ptr rtems_task_argument;

These comments may help RTEMS contributors which would like to make changes in
the generated files and guide them to the right place and tools.

As a conclusion, we do not have automatically generated code in this project
from the perspective of the software validation.
